The Project Gutenberg eBook of Whilst father was fighting, by
Eleanora H. Stooke

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Whilst father was fighting

Author: Eleanora H. Stooke

Illustrator: Albert Morrow

Release Date: June 6, 2023 [eBook #70920]

Language: English

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHILST FATHER WAS
FIGHTING ***

Transcriber's note: Unusual and inconsistent spelling is as printed.

[Illustration: SEVERAL BIG BOYS HAD POUNCED UPON THE APPLES
AND MADE OFF WITH THEM.]



                WHILST FATHER WAS FIGHTING


                          BY
                  ELEANORA H. STOOKE

           AUTHOR OF "LITTLE MAID MARIGOLD"



                       LONDON
            THE RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY
       MANCHESTER, MADRID, LISBON, BUDAPEST.



 MADE IN GREAT BRITAIN
 PRINTED BY THE RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY, LONDON



CONTENTS

CHAPTER

    I. AFRAID IN THE DARK

   II. THE NEW LODGER

  III. BOB AND STRAY MAKE AN ENEMY

   IV. ABOUT THE RUBY BROOCH

    V. THE EARL'S DAUGHTER

   VI. POOR STRAY!

  VII. BOB LAID UP

 VIII. GREAT NEWS

   IX. CONCERNING TOM SMITH

    X. STRAY TO THE RESCUE

   XI. MISS PEGGY'S DAUGHTER

  XII. CONCLUSION



WHILST FATHER WAS FIGHTING

CHAPTER I

AFRAID IN THE DARK

"Are you asleep, Jackie?"

Bob Middleton, closed the door of the attic which served as a bedroom
for himself and his little five-year-old brother as he spoke, and
stepped softly to the bedside.

No, Jackie was not asleep. He had sprung up in bed at the sound of
Bob's voice, and now cried chokingly—

"Oh, Bobbie, Bobbie!"

"Why, what is the matter, old chap?" Bob, inquired. The question was
needless, for he knew his little brother was crying from fear—fear of
being alone in the dark. "I hoped I should find you asleep," he went
on without waiting for a reply; "it was an hour ago that Aunt Martha
put you to bed, and you promised you'd try to go to sleep right
away."

"I did try," was the plaintive answer, followed by the anxious
inquiry—"Are you coming to bed now?"

"No," said Bob, "I've only come up for a few minutes. Aunt Martha
said I mustn't stay long, for she's several errands for me to do
yet." He went to the window—it was low in the sloping roof—and pulled
up the blind. "There, now!" he cried, "isn't that better? The moon's
like a big lamp in the sky, and the stare are shining ever so
brightly."

"I can see them," Jackie said, with a sobbing breath. "I wanted Aunt
Martha to pull up the blind, but she wouldn't, and—and she said if I
got out of bed she'd give me the stick. I hope she won't whip me
again, Bobbie; she does whip so hard."

Bob set his teeth and was silent for a minute. Mrs. Mead, their Aunt
Martha, was not always kind to Jackie. She was not always kind to him
either, but that he felt did not matter. He and his little brother—
Jackie was five years younger—had been living with Mrs. Mead for ten
months, ever since the beginning of the war with Germany, when their
father, a reservist, had rejoined the colours. Their previous home
had been in a village some miles from Bristol, where their father had
been employed on a farm.

Their mother had died when Jackie had been born, so there had been
no one but Aunt Martha to take charge of them when the call to arms
had taken their father from them. Mrs. Mead, who was a childless
widow, kept a greengrocer's shop in a dingy street in Bristol; and,
as she took lodgers, she had no room to spare her little nephews but
an attic. From the boys' attic, which was at the back of the house,
was a view of the river and the backs of the houses on the opposite
bank—not a very cheering view for eyes accustomed to pretty wooded
scenery.

"Well," Bob said, "I must be going. Don't cry any more, Jackie.
There's nothing to be afraid of up here, and it's quite light now
I've drawn up the blind. You can lie and watch the moon and stars.
I daresay father's watching them too, out in the trenches—"

"Oh, I want father!" Jackie broke in, "I want father!"

Bob wanted his father quite as much as his little brother did; but he
owned a brave heart, and, though it was very heavy, he answered
cheerfully—

"I daresay he'll be home on leave soon. Here, let me cover you up!"

He tucked the bedclothes around Jackie, then hurried out of the room,
leaving the door ajar. As he ran down the steep, narrow stairs he met
a little old woman toiling up, followed by an ugly brown dog.
He guessed who she was. There were two attics in the house, and the
previous day he had heard his aunt remark that she had let the front
attic to an old-age pensioner—a Mrs. Winter. No doubt this little old
woman was Mrs. Winter.

"There's a dog following you!" he called out, stopping and looking
after her.

"Yes," she said, glancing back at him with a smile, "he's my dog.
Stray he's called. Oh, dear me, who's that crying?"

"My little brother," Bob replied; "he doesn't like being left alone—
he's afraid."

He hurried on. Mrs. Winter, having reached the top stair, hesitated a
minute, then, instead of going into her own attic, walked into the
other, Stray at her heels.

Jackie was sitting up in bed, crying loudly. He became suddenly
silent when he saw Mrs. Winter.

"Good evening!" she began. "I'm Mrs. Winter. I've come to live in the
front attic, and should like to be friends with you and your brother.
Now, suppose you tell me your name?"

"Jackie," the little boy answered; "I'm five," he informed her, "and
Bob's ten."

Mrs. Winter took a chair by his side. He could see her face plainly
in the moonlight. Such a pleasant face it was, although it was old,
with bright brown eyes like a bird's and the happiest expression.

"I met your brother on the stairs," Mrs. Winter remarked, "he told me
you were afraid because you were left alone. But we're never really
alone you know, my dear. Jesus is always with us. Do you know about
Jesus, Jackie?"

"Oh, yes," said Jackie; "I go to Sunday school. Jesus is in Heaven."

Mrs. Winter nodded. "Yes, Jesus is in Heaven," she agreed, "and He's
here too. He's everywhere. No—" as Jackie glanced around the room—
"we can't see Him; nevertheless He's here, and you can speak to Him
whenever you like and be quite sure He'll hear you. Don't you know
that when you pray you are talking to Jesus? He loves you, and wants
you to love Him. Oh, He is such a good friend to have, Jackie!
I wonder, now, if you said your prayers to-night?"

"No," the little boy answered; "I forgot."

"Ah! I'm not surprised you felt lonely and frightened. I tell you
what, we'll pray together—just you and me. You can kneel upon the
bed, and I'll kneel beside it."

They did so, whilst Mrs. Winter offered up a prayer. It was a very
simple prayer, which asked Jesus to watch over Jackie and make him
feel His presence so that he might not be afraid, and the little boy
quite understood it.

"I like her," he said to himself, after Mrs. Winter had bidden him
"good-night" and gone away, accompanied by her dog; "she's a very
nice old woman. It was kind of her to come to see me. Oh, I do hope
she'll come again!"



CHAPTER II

THE NEW LODGER

JACKIE quite meant to keep awake till Bob came to bed, but he fell
asleep soon after Mrs. Winter had left him. When he awoke the bright
morning sunshine was shining into the attic, and Bob was in the midst
of dressing. He told him of Mrs. Winter's visit.

"It was kind of her to come," Bob said, pleased because Jackie seemed
to be. "Did you like her? Yes? That's all right, then! She's going to
pay Aunt Martha two shillings a week for the other attic and 'do for
herself'—that means clean her own room and cook her own food. Come,
tumble out of bed, Jackie, or you'll be late for breakfast!"

Quarter of an hour later the two boys went downstairs together to the
kitchen, where an untidy maid-of-all-work was preparing to cook bacon
for breakfast.

"I'll lay the table for you, Lizzie," Bob told her, and set about
doing so, Jackie helping him.

In a short while their aunt appeared upon the scene. She was a short,
stout woman, with a bustling manner and a nagging tongue.

"Past seven o'clock and breakfast not yet ready!" she began; "you
must have been idling, Lizzie, for I called you in good time!
Be careful what you're doing, Jackie! There, now, you careless child,
you've spilt the milk—and milk such a price, too! Sit down and
be quiet, for goodness sake!"

"He's helping me lay the breakfast things," Bob explained, as Mrs.
Mead pushed Jackie roughly aside; "it's only a little drop of milk
he's spilt, but I'll go without, then it won't matter."

Mrs. Mead made no response. She was a woman of uncertain temper, and
this morning she was in an ill-humour because the lodger who rented
her best rooms had given her notice yesterday to leave. She let two
sets of rooms; but her lodgers did for themselves, like Mrs. Winter,
so they were not much trouble to her.

Breakfast was eaten almost in silence; then Bob was sent to open the
shop, and at half-past eight the boys started for school. Jackie
attended an infant's school not far from home, but Bob had further
to go.

When Jackie came out of school at twelve o'clock almost the first
person he saw was Mrs. Winter, who was taking her dog for a walk.
He stopped and looked at her, thereby attracting her attention.
She did not recognise him at first glance, for he looked very
different from the little boy with the tear-stained face and
tear-blurred eyes she had seen last night. To-day Jackie's face was
all smiles, and his eyes were as blue and clear as the summer's sky.

Her second glance, however, told her who he was, and she exclaimed—

"Why, it's Jackie! How do you do, dear? I'm so glad to meet you, and
so's Stray. Come here, Stray, and make friends with Jackie!"

Jackie loved dogs, so he patted and made much of Stray; and Stray,
who loved to be noticed, was delighted.

"I suppose you're going home now, Jackie?" Mrs. Winter said
inquiringly.

"No," the little boy answered, "I'm going to meet Bobbie. You come
too!" He slipped his hand into the old woman's as he spoke, and they
walked on together, Stray running on ahead.

Jackie was very interested in Stray, and asked many questions about
him. He learnt that he was a come-by-chance.

"I found him in the street one wet night, when he was a puppy,"
Mrs. Winter explained; "he was shivering with cold, and I think
he'd have died if I hadn't taken him home with me. Next day I tried
to find his owner, but I couldn't, so I kept him. He's about
six years old now."

"Older than me!" exclaimed Jackie, adding, "Oh! I think he's a dear
dog!"

"He is," agreed Mrs. Winter; "he's no beauty, but he's as good as
gold, and so loving and faithful! I always feel thankful God sent him
to me."

"I thought you said you found him?" said Jackie.

"So I did," replied Mrs. Winter smiling; "but I'm sure God put him
in my way so that I might befriend him. God is love, you know, and
for certain He loves every creature He made. It tells us in the Bible
that He cares for the sparrows, and I'm as sure He cares for Stray as
I'm sure He cares for you and me."

This was a new idea to Jackie, so he pondered it in silence.
Presently Mrs. Winter said—

"Isn't this your brother coming towards us?"

Yes, it was Bob. He looked surprised when he saw Jackie's companions;
then a smile lit up his face, and shone in his eyes, which were as
clear and blue as his little brother's.

"It was ever so kind of you to go in and talk to Jackie last night,
Mrs. Winter!" were the first words he said. "You see," he went on,
"Aunt Martha puts him to bed early, and he lies awake getting more
and more frightened the darker it gets, and—"

"Oh, he shan't do that any longer if I can help it!" Mrs. Winter
broke in. "I'll ask Mrs. Mead if I may sit with him till he falls
asleep, shall I?"

"Oh, if you only would!" Bob cried gratefully. "You'd like that,
wouldn't you?" he asked Jackie.

"It would be lovely," the little boy answered; "I shouldn't mind its
being dark then."

Mrs. Mead was secretly pleased when her new lodger offered to relieve
her of the task of putting Jackie to bed every night, and consented
at once.

"I used to be a children's nurse," Mrs. Winter told her, "so I
understand little people and love them. You will not object to my
staying with Jackie for a bit after he's in bed?"

"Oh, no!" Mrs. Mead answered. "I'm afraid you were disturbed by his
crying last night. I couldn't let Bob stop with him because I wanted
his help—he runs errands for me in the evenings, you see."

As a matter of fact, Mrs. Mead was working Bob much too hard, sending
him here, there, and everywhere to fetch and carry loads of
vegetables a great deal too heavy for his strength. He had been very
high-spirited and the picture of health when he had come to Bristol;
but he was daily growing thinner, and paler, and more and more
depressed. It took a load of anxiety from his mind, however, to know
that no longer whilst he was at work for his aunt in the evenings
would Jackie be crying and fretting in the dark.

"Don't you feel tremendously grateful to Mrs. Winter?" he asked
Jackie one day, about a week after the new lodger's arrival.

"Oh, yes!" the little boy replied, "I do, Bobbie. She's a dear, and
Stray's a dear, too! I love them both! It was kind of God to send
them here!"

"How do you know He did?" questioned Bob.

"Because Mrs. Winter told me so," was the prompt response.

"How does she know, Jackie?"

Jackie shook his head.

"She didn't tell me," he said; "but I'll ask her. She did say it,
so of course it's true."



CHAPTER III

BOB AND STRAY MAKE AN ENEMY

THE first time Mrs. Mead called on her new lodger to receive her
rent, which had to be paid weekly, she looked around the attic
approvingly, so dainty and clean was everything; then she raised her
eyebrows in surprise, for seated at the little round table near the
window was Jackie, a picture of contentment, his head bent over a
picture book Mrs. Winter had lent him.

"Why, Jackie, how comes it you are here?" Mrs. Mead inquired. Without
waiting for a reply she turned to Mrs. Winter, and said—"I hope he
doesn't worry you; you must send him away if he does."

"Oh, he doesn't!" Mrs. Winter assured her. "I love having him with
me, and he didn't know what to do with himself as there's no school
to-day."

"Such a mistake giving children a whole holiday on Saturday!" Mrs.
Mead grumbled, "I'm sure they don't need it; though I admit I'm glad
to have Bob at home to run errands, as Saturday is always my busiest
day."

Mrs. Winter paid her rent, and had her rent-book receipted. Then Mrs.
Mead observed Stray, who was lying on a mat before the fireplace.

"He seems a well-behaved, quiet dog," she remarked, "and you keep him
very clean; his coat looks in good condition, as though it was
brushed pretty often."

"It is, every day," Mrs. Winter replied smiling.

"I brushed and combed him this morning," Jackie informed his aunt
eagerly; "and, afterwards, he jumped up and licked my face, so he
must like me, mustn't he?"

Mrs. Mead nodded.

"It must cost you something to feed him, Mrs. Winter," she said.
"I'll tell Lizzie to save our scraps for him in future."

Every day after that a plate of scraps was sent up to Mrs. Winter's
attic from the kitchen, so that now Stray was better fed than he had
ever been in his life before.

Swiftly passed the summer days, then came August when the schools
were closed for a month. It was really no holiday for Bob, because
his aunt kept him running errands and allowed him no time to himself.
Only on Sundays did he get any rest.

Mrs. Mead always took her nephews to church with her on Sunday
mornings. During the remainder of the day she did not trouble about
them, as long as they kept out of her way; so when one Sunday
afternoon, on their return from Sunday school, Mrs. Winter asked them
to take tea with her they accepted her invitation at once.

Jackie was now quite at home in Mrs. Winter's attic; but Bob had
never been there before. They had their tea at the little round table
near the window. It was a very frugal repast of bread not very
thickly buttered, and weak tea; but both Bob and Jackie enjoyed it
a great deal more than they had ever enjoyed a Sunday tea with Aunt
Martha. Bob thought Mrs. Winter the nicest old woman he had ever
known. He told her about their old home in the country, and talked to
her of his father; then began to ask questions.

"Has your husband been dead long, Mrs. Winter?" he inquired.

"Nigh twenty years, my dear," she answered; "he was a sailor—a good,
God-fearing man. His ship went down with all hands in a storm."

"Oh, then he was drowned!" Bob exclaimed, looking at her
sympathetically. "Haven't you any children?" was his next question.

"I had one, a little boy; but when he was about the age of Jackie
I had to part with him—God took him to Himself," Mrs. Winter replied.
There was a look of pain on her face for a minute, then it gave place
to a brighter look. "I'm fond of boys for my own boy's sake," she
added smiling, "so you two will always find a welcome here whenever
you may care to come."

That first Sunday tea in Mrs. Winter's attic was followed by others,
and the friendship between the old woman and the brothers grew apace.
Stray had taken a great liking to Bob; so Mrs. Winter was very glad
to let Bob take him out sometimes, whilst the boy was delighted to
have the dog for company when he was running errands for Aunt Martha.

One evening, at the end of August, Bob, who had been sent late
to deliver a heavy load of potatoes at a house a long distance from
Mrs. Mead's shop, was returning with his empty basket, accompanied by
Stray, when he saw a crowd around the entrance of a big building
which he knew to be a hospital for wounded soldiers, and paused to
inquire what was doing.

"There's going to be a concert to-night for the patients," someone
told him, "and a great lady is going to sing—people are waiting
to see her."

"A great lady?" said Bob inquiringly. "Who?"

"Lady Margaret Browning," was the reply, "she's an earl's daughter.
Her husband, Captain Browning, is in France where the fighting is."

"Oh, then he's a soldier!" Bob exclaimed, adding proudly, "So's my
father!"

A young lady passing, leaning on the arm of an elderly gentleman,
caught the ring of affectionate pride in Bob's voice, and looked back
over her shoulder at the boy with a smile so full of goodwill and
understanding that she won his heart completely. She was wearing
a long, dark cloak, and a hood was pulled over her head, but the hem
of a white silk gown showed under the cloak. Bob only noticed that
she was young, and that her face, with its large grey eyes, was the
sweetest he had ever seen. He watched her disappear, with her
companion in the crowd, and was about to go on his way himself when
he caught sight of something sparkling on the pavement not a yard
from him, and picked it up. It proved to be a small brooch, shaped
like a sword, the hilt of which was set with bright red stones.
He moved under a lamp to examine it.

"Hulloa, youngster!" said a voice behind him at that moment, "what's
that you've got there?"

It was a big boy called Tom Smith who had addressed him, whose father
kept a pawnshop a few doors from Mrs. Mead's shop. Bob disliked Tom
because he was a bully, but he was not afraid of him.

"It's something I've found," he answered. "No!" as the other boy
would have taken it from him—"I'm not going to part with it!"

Tom laughed.

"'Finding's keeping'!" he quoted. "You might let me look at it,
though!"

Bob did so. Tom looked at it in silence for a minute, then said—

"I see. It's only one of those cheap brooches you can buy anywhere
for sixpence-halfpenny. Like to sell it I'll give you a shilling
for it."

Bob was shrewd enough to know that if Tom really valued the brooch
at only sixpence-halfpenny he would not offer to buy it for as much
again nearly as it was worth, so he said he intended to keep it.

"Oh, you do, do you?" Tom cried angrily, with a threatening look.
"I'll see about that!"

He tried to snatch the brooch from Bob, but failed. The next moment
Stray, all his teeth showing, had flown at him.

"Call him off!" he shouted, "call him off! He's got me by the leg!"

But Stray had only got him by the leg of his trousers fortunately.
He dropped his hold the instant Bob bade him do so, and followed Bob
quietly when he walked away.

Tom Smith was now in a furious passion.

"I'll be even with you for this!" he yelled after Bob, "with you and
that ugly brute of a dog, too! Mark my words—I'll be even with you
both!"



CHAPTER IV

ABOUT THE RUBY BROOCH

BOB hurried home, the brooch he had found safe in the breast-pocket
of his coat. He did not show it to his aunt, as she was gossiping
in the shop with a neighbour. She broke off in her conversation to
tell him she had no further errands for him that night, and ordered
him to take his supper and go to bed.

In the kitchen Lizzie had his supper ready. He showed her the brooch,
allowing her to examine it in her own hand.

"'Tis lovely!" the girl exclaimed; "I believe those red stones are
rubies! How they do sparkle, to be sure!"

"Yes, don't they?" said Bob. "That's how I came to find the brooch.
I saw the stones sparkling."

"I've heard that rubies are just as valuable as diamonds," Lizzie
told him; "if so, this brooch must be worth a pretty penny."

"What do you call a pretty penny, Lizzie?"

"Pounds, maybe."

"Oh! then that's why Tom Smith wanted to take it away from me!"

Bob told Lizzie all that had passed between Tom and him. She was most
indignant.

"A sixpenny-halfpenny brooch, indeed!" she cried. "Oh, I'm glad Stray
gave him a good fright! Where is Stray, by the way? Gone upstairs
to his missus, I suppose?"

"Yes," Bob replied, adding anxiously, "I hope Tom Smith will never do
him any harm—he's such a cruel boy, you know."

Lizzie handed him back the brooch, advising him to take great care
of it.

"It may be advertised for," she said; "if so, there's sure to be
a reward offered, and you'll get it. Mind you keep it safe!"

"Oh, I will," he assured her; "no fear about that!"

Bob was very tired when by-and-bye he said "good-night" to Lizzie and
went upstairs. He made sure that Jackie was asleep, then paid a call
on Mrs. Winter. The old woman was seated at her little round table,
reading her Bible by the light of a candle. She nodded to a chair,
and bade her visitor take it; then, as he obeyed, said, in a tone
of concern—

"You look quite done up, my dear!"

"I'm dreadfully tired," Bob admitted, with a weary sigh. "And my legs
do ache so—it's growing pains Aunt Martha says. Look here what
I've found!" He laid the ruby brooch in front of her as he spoke.

Mrs. Winter looked at it, gave a start, and changed colour. She did
not speak, but sat quite still with her eyes fixed on the glittering
jewel, whilst Bob explained where and how he had found it, and how
Tom Smith had tried to take it from him.

"Do you think it is valuable, Mrs. Winter?" he questioned.

"Oh, yes, undoubtedly!" she answered. Then she took the brooch in her
hand and examined it. "How strange if it should be the same!"
she murmured to herself.

"What do you mean?" Bob inquired in surprise.

"I've seen a brooch exactly like this one before," she replied;
"it belonged to a young lady I knew—I'd been her nurse when she was a
little girl. The brooch was given to her by the gentleman she
afterwards married; he was in the Army, and a very nice gentleman
he was. They went out to India almost directly after they were
married, and she died there, leaving him with a little baby girl.
Poor Miss Peggy! She used to love her 'Nana,' as she always called
me. How well I remember the last time I saw her—not long before my
husband died that was, and just before she went to India. 'Nana,' she
said, 'don't you forget me! We shall meet again some day!' And so we
shall, Bob, when I get to Heaven—I shall find Miss Peggy there safe
with Jesus."

There was a minute's silence after that. Mrs. Winter was the one
who broke it.

"It's too late to take any steps about finding the owner of this
to-night," she remarked, laying the brooch on the table; "but
to-morrow you ought to go to the police-station and give notice
that you've found it. I think that would be the right thing to do."

"Then I'll do it," agreed Bob promptly; "I'll go to the
police-station directly after breakfast, if all's well."

"Do, my dear. And mind you put the brooch in a safe place to-night."

"I wonder if you would keep it for me, Mrs. Winter? Yes? Oh, thank
you! Oh, I do wish you'd go to the police-station with me!"

Mrs. Winter considered a minute. "Very well," she agreed, "I will.
See, I'll put the brooch away in my desk; it will be safe there."

She placed the brooch under some papers and locked the desk
carefully.

"Thank you!" said Bob. "How kind you are to Jackie and me,
Mrs. Winter!" he exclaimed. "Jackie says you told him God sent you
here—that you know He did, but how can you know it?"

"Because when I was on the look-out for a bed-sitting-room I prayed
to Him for guidance and help," Mrs. Winter said simply; "then I heard
of this attic, and that was the answer to my prayer, was it not? So I
took the attic. It suits me very well. My dear, I always tell God
about everything; it makes things so much easier and takes a weight
of care from one. This—" laying her hand on her Bible—"tells us to
'Be careful for nothing; but in everything by prayer and supplication
with thanksgiving let your requests be known unto God.' Oh, yes,
God sent me here sure enough!"

"Jackie and I didn't want to come here at all," Bob admitted;
"but we've liked it ever so much better since you came."

Mrs. Winter's face glowed with pleasure on hearing this, and her
bright dark eyes had a wonderfully tender light in them.

"My dear," she exclaimed affectionately, "how glad I am! It makes me
so happy to think I've been able to brighten your lives ever so
little. You and Jackie have become very dear to me. If I had to leave
here I should miss you boys dreadfully!"

"And we should miss you dreadfully!" replied Bob gravely. "Aunt
Martha says you're a very good, quiet lodger, and she hopes you'll
stay," he continued, "so why should you talk of leaving if this attic
suits you? You did say it suited you, you know."

"So I did, and I meant it. I don't want to leave, and I am sure Stray
does not."

"Good old Stray!" exclaimed Bob. "If it hadn't been for him I should
certainly have had the brooch stolen from me, for Tom Smith's ever
so much stronger and bigger than I am!"

"Tom Smith must be a very wicked boy, Bob."

Bob nodded. "I expect," he said, "he guessed the brooch was real
gold, and if he could have got it he'd have pretended it was he,
and not I, who'd found it. It would have been only my word
against his."



CHAPTER V

THE EARL'S DAUGHTER

THE following morning, when Bob went down to breakfast, he found that
his aunt had heard of his find from Lizzie, and was displeased
because he had not shown it to her.

"I daresay it's a trumpery thing," she said, "but you ought to have
let me see it. If you've left it upstairs fetch it at once."

Bob explained that Mrs. Winter was keeping it for him, and had
promised to go with him to the police-station about it. On hearing
this Mrs. Mead became very angry.

"Mrs. Winter takes too much upon herself!" she cried. "Tell her
to give you the brooch at once! And tell her, too, that I hope
in future she'll kindly mind her own business! As though I'm not
to be trusted to do what's right!"

Bob fetched the brooch from Mrs. Winter, but did not give her
his aunt's rude message.

Mrs. Mead made no remark as she examined the brooch. She held it
first one way, then another, to make the stones sparkle, then put it
in her pocket.

"What are you going to do with it, Aunt Martha?" inquired Bob.

"Keep it safe for you," she replied. "It's very pretty, and I think
it's gold; but I can't tell about the stones—whether they're rubies
or only red glass. If they're rubies the brooch will be advertised
for and there'll be a reward for the finder. Say nothing about it
to anyone for the time."

"Then you don't think I ought to take it to the police-station?"

"Not at present. Wait a while and see what happens."

Nothing happened in connection with the brooch that day. But the day
following Bob noticed a printed bill in a shop window, which
advertised the loss of a brooch exactly answering the description
of the one he had found and said that anyone finding it and bringing
it to Lady Margaret Browning, at a certain hotel on Clifton Down,
would receive a reward of five pounds. He hurried home immediately
and told Mrs. Mead what he had seen.

"Five pounds!" she exclaimed, "Humph! that's not so bad!"

"Not so bad!" Bob echoed. "I call it splendid! Oh, do let me have the
brooch and I'll take it to Lady Margaret Browning at once!"

"Not so fast!" his aunt replied. "You must wait till after dinner,
then I'll go with you. I can leave Lizzie to look after the shop
for once, and I daresay Mrs. Winter will not mind taking charge
of Jackie."

Mrs. Mead was in high good humour now. Matters were arranged as she
wished, and so, about four o'clock in the afternoon, she and Bob
arrived at the hotel mentioned on the bill. Mrs. Mead inquired for
Lady Margaret Browning, and explained that they had come to return
her lost brooch to her. They were immediately shown into a
sitting-room where a young lady was seated at a writing-table.

"Oh!" she cried, on hearing her visitors' errand, "how glad I am!
Yes—" as Mrs. Mead produced the brooch and handed it to her—"that is
it! Oh, how delighted my father will be! It was my mother's—I lost my
mother when I was a baby—and father gave it to me on my twenty-first
birthday. Please sit down, both of you!"

She had risen at their entrance, but now took her chair again, whilst
Bob and his aunt seated themselves side by side on a sofa. Bob,
to his great surprise, had recognised Lady Margaret Browning as the
young lady who had smiled at him so sweetly outside the soldier's
hospital when he had been so proud to say that his father was a
soldier. And she was a great lady—an earl's daughter!

"Surely I have seen you before?" she said, looking at him earnestly.

"Yes, miss," answered Bob, blushing.

"Say 'my lady,' Bob," whispered his aunt hastily.

"Oh, never mind!" said Lady Margaret. Then a flash of recognition
crossed her face. "Ah, I remember you now," she cried, "and the way
you spoke of your father! Is he at one of the fronts?"

"Yes, my lady," Bob replied; "in France."

Lady Margaret looked very interested. She was evidently going to ask
Bob more questions about his father, but before she could do so Mrs.
Mead interrupted the conversation to explain that she was making
a home for her two motherless nephews during her brother's absence.

"Poor little fellows!" Lady Margaret said softly. Then she asked Bob
his name and his age. "He looks pale and thin," she remarked to Mrs.
Mead after the boy had answered her.

"He grows so fast—that's the reason," Mrs. Mead replied, adding,
"And he works hard at school."

"But it's holiday time now, isn't it?" questioned Lady Margaret.

"Oh, yes!" Bob assented, "only—" He broke off and was silent.

He had been about to say that he worked hard in the school holidays,
carrying heavy loads of vegetables, but a frowning glance from his
aunt had stopped him.

Lady Margaret now rang the bell and ordered tea for her visitors.
Bob was too shy to take much, but his aunt drank several cups of tea,
and made a good meal on the dainties offered her. There was a cake
which was not cut, and that Lady Margaret made into a parcel and gave
to Bob to take home to his little brother. He was so pleased that he
could scarcely find words with which to thank her, and when Lady.
Margaret put five one-pound notes into his hand, the reward for the
return of the brooch, he was absolutely speechless.

"Good-bye, Bob," she said, kindly; "I'm going to London to-morrow;
but I hope to come here again before long, and if I do I shall try
to see you. I should like to hear more about your father. I'm sure
he must be a very good father, or you wouldn't love him so much,
and be so proud of him. May God bless him and keep him!"

"Good-bye, my lady," the boy replied, looking at her gratefully.
"Oh, I do hope I shall see you again! And Jackie would like to see
you too!"

"And I should like to see Jackie!" she said, smiling. "Will you
please give me your address?" she asked Mrs. Mead.

Mrs. Mead did so. But on the way home she told Bob she thought it
most unlikely he would see anything more of Lady Margaret, who would
most probably go away and never think of him again.

"Oh, I hope not!" the boy exclaimed. "I liked her so much! And didn't
she speak nicely about father? I thought it so kind of her to say,
'May God bless him and keep him!' And the way she spoke, so softly
and solemnly! Oh, Aunt Martha, it sounded like a prayer!"



CHAPTER VI

POOR STRAY!

BOB was eager to tell Mrs. Winter about his visit to the grand hotel
on Clifton Down, which had seemed to him quite a palace, and all that
Lady Margaret Browning had said to him; but he had no opportunity of
doing so till the next day when, late in the evening, he went
upstairs for the night. Then he had half an hour's talk with her
in her attic. She heard all he had to tell with the greatest
interest, and remarked smilingly that she supposed he felt himself
a rich man now he was the owner of five pounds.

"Oh, yes!" he agreed; "it's a lot of money, isn't it? But the worst
of it is Aunt Martha doesn't want me to spend it. She's going to keep
it for me till father comes back. I should like to give Jackie a
present; but she won't agree to my spending even a few shillings?"

"I think, perhaps she's right," said Mrs. Winter, "If you broke the
five pounds you'd probably spend more than would be wise. Think how
surprised and delighted your father will be to find you with five
whole pounds, Bob!"

"Yes! He shall have them all, Mrs. Winter!" Mrs. Winter nodded.

"Now," she said, "I've something to tell you. I've been talking
to-day to someone who knows about Lady Margaret Browning, and I've
found out that she's the daughter of that young lady I was telling
you about, the 'Miss Peggy' I loved so much. So you see I had seen
the ruby brooch before."

"Oh, how strange!" Bob cried, in amazement.

"Yes, isn't it? Miss Peggy's husband wasn't an earl when she married
him; he only became one on the death of an uncle a few years since.
Oh, how I'd love to see Miss Peggy's daughter!"

"Perhaps you will some day," Bob replied quickly, "for I do believe
she means to come and see Jackie and me, though Aunt Martha says
she'll go away and not think of me again."

"She'll think of you again if she's anything like her mother,"
Mrs. Winter told him, "and from what you say, I think she may be.
It was just like her mother to ask God's blessing on your father.
'The blessing of the Lord, it maketh rich, and He addeth no sorrow
with it.' That's something worth having, isn't it?"

Next morning at breakfast Bob told his aunt that Mrs. Winter had been
nurse to Lady Margaret Browning's mother, and she was greatly
surprised.

"Well, I never!" she exclaimed, "who'd have thought it! And Mrs.
Winter so poor too!"

"Do you think she's very poor?" asked Bob anxiously.

His aunt nodded.

"She told me herself she's only a few shillings a week more than her
old-age pension to live on," she said; "it's hard lines for her,
because I hear from outsiders that her husband left her a few
hundreds—she lent the money to a relative who lost it in his
business. If I was she I'd apply to Lady Margaret Browning for help."

"Oh, I don't think she'd like to!" Bob answered quickly, for he
realised his kind old friend was not the sort of person to ask
charity.

Nevertheless, he quite made up his mind that when he saw Lady
Margaret Browning again—he believed he would see her again—that he
would tell her all about her dead mother's old nurse.

Bob was kept busy by his aunt that morning, running errands. He was
toiling along with a heavy basket filled with vegetables and fruit
when he came around a corner upon Tom Smith. He would have passed
without speaking, but Tom stood in front of him and stopped him.

"Hulloa; youngster!" was the bully's greeting, followed by the
question: "What about that brooch?"

"Well, what about it?" said Bob coldly. Tom gave him a shrewd look.
"I suppose you saw the printed bills in the shop windows?" he said
inquiringly. "Well—" as Bob nodded—"did you get the reward?"

"Yes, of course."

"And what about me in the matter?" Tom asked, much to Bob's
amazement. "You know I saw the brooch on the ground at the same time
as you did," he went on untruthfully, "but you were quicker than me
and picked it up first."

"I don't know anything of the sort!" Bob cried indignantly. "How can
you tell such a wicked story?"

"It's not a wicked story and I dare you to say so! It's true! And my
word's as good as yours, I hope! You ought to halve that five pounds
with me, or, at any rate, give me something out of it."

"I'm not going to give you anything!"

"You're not?"

"No."

Tom took a step nearer to Bob, and made a threatening gesture as
though he would strike him. Bob looked him steadily in the eyes,
and did not flinch. The bully hesitated a minute, then a cruel
expression crossed his face.

"If you don't give me a share of that five pounds I'll make you wish
you had!" he declared. "Come, now, a pound will satisfy me. No?
Ten shillings then?"

"I won't give you a farthing," Bob told him, "for I am positive
you never saw the brooch before I'd picked it up. Let me pass.
I can't stop talking any longer! Do you hear? Let me pass!"

Instead of doing so Tom gave Bob a violent push which made him
stagger and upset some apples from his basket. In a minute several
big boys, friends of Tom Smith's, who had been standing by, listening
and watching, had pounced upon the apples and made off with them.
Bob stood aghast with dismay, whilst Tom broke into a roar
of laughter and quickly followed his friends.

"Whatever will Aunt Martha say?" thought poor Bob. "And they are
eating apples, too, not cheap cooking ones!"

Unfortunately for Bob Mrs. Mead was not in a good humour when he
returned home with the tale that some boys had stolen the apples from
him, and she was too angry to listen when he attempted to explain all
that had happened.

"You're not to be trusted!" she said severely. "Why, those apples
were worth twopence each! Early apples are always dear, especially
dessert ones. What's that you say, that a boy you'd been talking to
was to blame and not you? What business had you dawdling away your
time talking to any one, pray? Don't try to make any more excuses,
and get out of my sight!"

Bob obeyed. He went upstairs, but found the attics empty. No doubt
Mrs. Winter and Jackie and Stray had gone for a walk. He seated
himself on the edge of his bed to wait for their return, his heart
hot with indignation and the feeling that he had been unjustly
treated. By-and-bye, being very tired, he took off his dusty boots,
and lay down on the bed to rest. In a few minutes he was asleep.

Bob had been asleep for nearly an hour when he was awakened by voices
in the other attic. He sat up, rubbing his eyes, and called—

"Jackie! Jackie!"

"Oh, come here, Bobbie!" was the answer. "Stray's hurted!"

Bob bounded off the bed and rushed into Mrs. Winter's attic. Jackie
was there, in tears, and Mrs. Winter, who was kneeling on the floor
beside Stray. The dog was allowing his mistress to examine a nasty
cut behind one of his ears.

"Oh, Bobbie," Jackie cried, "Stray's hurted drefful! A bad boy
did it. He threw a stone and hit him."

"The brute!" exclaimed Bob furiously. "The cowardly brute! It must
have been Tom Smith! Oh, poor Stray!—poor Stray!"



CHAPTER VII

BOB LAID UP

HAPPILY Stray proved not to be seriously hurt, and in a few days
his wound was healing nicely. Jackie, though he had seen the stone
thrown, could only give a very hazy description of the thrower, who,
it seemed, had run away the instant he had seen he had hit the dog.
Bob would have gone to Tom Smith in hot haste and accused him
of having done the cruel deed, but Mrs. Winter had prevented
his doing so, by pointing out that they had no proof that Tom was
the culprit.

Bob felt sure that Tom Smith was the stone-thrower nevertheless.
He did not see him again till after the school holidays, when,
one morning on his way to school, he passed him in the street.

"What about that dog of yours now?" Tom shouted after him with a
jeering laugh, thus showing that Bob had not misjudged him.

Bob wheeled around sharply, his heart hot with indignation; and went
back, his eyes ablaze with anger.

"Look here," he said, "I want a word with you. The dog's not mine,
he belongs to one of my aunt's lodgers—but that doesn't matter
to you. What I've got to say is this, if you ever throw a stone
at him again, I'll go to the police about you and get you punished."

"Do you think I'm afraid of the police?" sneered Tom.

"Yes, I do," Bob answered. "I saw you slink away the other night—
you were bullying a boy younger than yourself—when you saw
a policeman coming. There's a law to stop people who are cruel
to dumb animals. I've heard about it from my father, who can't bear
to see animals of any kind badly treated. You're a big coward,
Tom Smith, that's what you are!"

"Take care what you say!" shouted Tom, turning crimson. "You're a
cheeky youngster! As for your father, he's only a common Tommy!"

"A common Tommy!" echoed Bob, adding quickly, "Anyway, he's a brave
man, and he wouldn't hurt a poor dog like you did."

"If you're not careful what you say, I'll give you something
you won't like!" Tom threatened.

"You'd better not!" Bob retorted.

And Tom decided that he had better not, for after looking at Bob
uncertainly for a minute, he muttered something under his breath,
turned sharply on his heel, and moved on.

"I don't think he'll dare do any harm to Stray again," thought Bob;
"he saw I meant it when I said I'd go to the police about him."

Mrs. Mead had forgiven Bob by this time for the loss of her apples,
and was using him as an errand boy out of school hours as she had
done before. Sometimes when he went to bed he was so weary and his
limbs ached so much that he could not; get to sleep till the early
hours of the morning, and this began to tell on his health. Then,
at the end of October, he caught a bad cold on the chest and had to
be in bed several days.

During those days it was Mrs. Winter who nursed him. Lizzie brought
him his food, and Mrs. Mead came to see how he was night and morning;
but it was his kind old neighbour who poulticed his chest, and gave
him his cough mixture regularly, and sat with him whilst his little
brother was at school, telling him stories, or talking to him of her
young days and the children she had had in her care.

"I loved them all," she said, as she was keeping him company
one afternoon, "but not one quite so well as Miss Peggy. The little
dear was an orphan, just three years old, when I went to be her
nurse, and her aunt, who was her guardian, left her entirely to my
care. It was I who taught her to love Jesus—to know Him as her
Saviour Who died for her. Ah, she loved Him and trusted Him with all
her heart, did Miss Peggy! 'I feel He's near me, Nana!' she used
to say."

"It's a great thing to feel that," Bob remarked thoughtfully, adding,
"Jackie is not half so afraid of the dark now you've made him
understand that Jesus is there."

"Bless his dear little heart, no!" Mrs. Winter agreed, with her
sunniest smile.

Bob was struck by the brightness of her expression. "I think you're
the happiest person I ever knew," he said; "you're so cheerful that
it does one good to be with you. Mrs. Winter, I should like to ask
you a question—if you won't be offended?"

"Oh, I am sure I shall not be offended!"

"Then—are you very poor?"

"Yes, as far as money goes, and poorer I shall be if food continues
to rise in price. But God will provide for me, my dear, don't you
fear! See how He's providing for Stray now! I was wondering how I
should be able to get food for the dog that day your aunt promised
to save the scraps of the house for him. Don't you think God put that
kind thought into her heart? I do!"

Stray was generally with his mistress when she visited Bob. He was
to-day, lying on the shabby strip of carpet by the bedside. He looked
up and wagged his tail every time his name was mentioned. Mrs. Winter
stooped and patted him.

"He misses his walks with you, Bob," she said; "I don't take him far
enough to satisfy him. I tell you what I think I'll do this afternoon
as the weather's fine and sunny. I'll meet Jackie as he comes out of
school, and take Stray with me."

"Oh, I wish you would!" Bob cried eagerly. "Jackie didn't come
straight home yesterday, and I couldn't think what had become of him.
I made up my mind he had met with some accident—been knocked down by
a motor-car, perhaps, and killed! He had only been playing with other
little boys he told me, and he promised he'd come straight home
to-day; but it would be kind of you to meet him."

"Oh, I will!" Mrs. Winter broke in. "I'll take him for a little walk;
but we won't be long."

"Oh, I shall know he's all right if he's with you," Bob replied.
"Aunt Martha says I'm silly to be nervous about him, and I daresay
I am; but almost the last words father said to me were, 'Look after
Jackie, Bob!' and I don't think I could face father again if anything
happened to him. It's nearly four o'clock, isn't it, Mrs. Winter?"

"It's twenty to four," she answered, rising. "I'll go at once. Come,
Stray!"

The dog followed her from the room. A few minutes later Bob heard him
scamper down the stairs, barking excitedly, and his mistress trying
to quieten him.

"They'll be in time," the boy said to himself; "what Jackie and I'd
do without Mrs. Winter now I really don't know!"



CHAPTER VIII

GREAT NEWS

JACKIE was delighted on coming out of school to find Mrs. Winter and
Stray waiting for him; and when the old woman spoke of a walk, and
asked him to go with her, his blue eyes shone with pleasure.

"Oh, yes, please, do let me!" he answered quickly. Then the blue eyes
clouded suddenly; and he said with a sigh, "No, thank you,
Mrs. Winter."

"Why not, my dear?" she inquired in surprise.

"Because I promised Bob I'd go straight home," he replied.

"Oh, yes! I had forgotten! But Bob knows I'm here to meet you, and he
wishes you to come with me; so it's all right."

"Oh, how jolly! Let's go and look at the shops, shall we?"

Mrs. Winter nodded smilingly. A ten minutes' walk brought them to one
of the busiest streets in the city, where there were most attractive
shops. Jackie liked toyshops best, next to them the sweet shops; and,
oh, how Mrs. Winter wished that she had a few pence she could spare
to buy a present for her little companion!

"I'm sorry I've no money to spend, Jackie," she said regretfully,
by-and-bye.

"So'm I," the little boy replied; "we'd buy something for Bobbie
if you had, wouldn't we? But, never mind, we can tell him about all
the beautiful things—he'll like to hear about them."

"Fortunately there's no charge for looking," Mrs. Winter remarked,
as they stopped before a toyshop. "Do you see that big Teddy-bear,
Jackie?"

"I like horses better than Teddy-bears," he told her, "I like that
horse there." He pointed to a toy worth a couple of shillings.
"Bobbie was going to buy it for me, only Aunt Martha wouldn't let him
have the money. He says when father comes home perhaps I may
have it—if it's not sold before then."

"If it is, I daresay there are others in the shop you will like
as well. Come, my dear, it's nearly five o'clock—time we turned
homewards now."

The last shop they stopped to look at was a sweet shop. Jackie's eyes
fastened themselves on some sugar mice—white ones and pink ones.

"I wonder if they're 'spensive," he said wistfully.

"They're marked a penny each," Mrs. Winter answered. Oh, surely she
could spare one penny? Yes, if she drank her tea without milk for a
couple of days. She took her purse from her pocket, opened it,
and the next moment a penny was in her little companion's hand.

"Buy yourself a mouse, my dear!" she said kindly.

"Oh, thank you, thank you!" Jackie answered. He had flushed with
pleasure, but his blue eyes were lifted to her face wonderingly.
"You said you hadn't any money to spend," he reminded her.

"I know I did, and I thought I hadn't," she replied, "but I've
suddenly remembered that I can do without this penny. Now, are you
going to have a white mouse or a pink one?"

"I've seen white mice," the little boy remarked thoughtfully, "but
never pink ones. I wonder if there are really pink mice—the pink ones
lock very pretty, don't they? I think I'll have a pink one."

He went into the shop and made his purchase, whilst Mrs. Winter
waited outside. The girl who took his order offered him the mouse
without putting it in paper.

"I want it wrapped up; please," he said, "I'm not going to eat it—
not now anyway."

"Paper's so dear on account of the war that we've got to be careful
of it," she told him. Nevertheless she put the pink mouse into a
little paper bag. "There, my dear," she said, handing him
his purchase, "will that do?"

"Oh, yes, thank you!" smiled Jackie. He took the bag and gave her
his penny.

"Good afternoon!" she nodded.

"Good afternoon, miss!" the little boy answered politely, as he left
the shop.

He rejoined Mrs. Winter, and ten minutes later they reached home.
As they entered the house by the side door Mrs. Mead came into the
passage from the shop. She had a newspaper in her hand.

"I've been up with Bob," she said, addressing Mrs. Winter, "and have
taken him news of his father. It's in the newspaper—indeed, it's in
every newspaper, I hear. My brother's proved himself a real hero,
Mrs. Winter; he's done a very brave deed—gone out under fire again
and again and brought in several men who were wounded. Now, what do
you think of that?"

"I think it was splendid of him!" Mrs. Winter declared. "Oh, how
proud you must feel of him, Mrs. Mead! And he is quite safe himself?
Yes? Oh, thank God! Jackie, you don't understand, darling!"
She stooped and kissed the little boy who stood by listening,
looking very puzzled.

"How fond you are of children!" exclaimed Mrs. Mead. "I've bought
two newspapers," she went on, "and I've given one to Bob—he'll let
you see it, I daresay. The other I want to keep to show folks.
Run upstairs to Bob, Jackie, he'll explain to you about father!
I'll send your tea upstairs. You shall have cake and jam, as it's a
red-letter day, I'm sure. And why not invite Mrs. Winter to tea
with you? You won't have to wait for tea till your kettle boils
if you wouldn't mind having it with the boys for once in a way,
Mrs. Winter."

"Mind?" cried Mrs. Winter. "Oh, I should like it! You are kind,
Mrs. Mead."

Mrs. Mead looked pleased but surprised. She did not know how very
bare was the corner cupboard in which her attic lodger kept
her stores.

"Well, and aren't you kind to the children?" she said. "See, what
you've done for Bob! I couldn't have spared the time to look after
him as you've done. Don't talk of being kind!"

Mrs. Mead bustled away, whilst Mrs. Winter went upstairs; Jackie had
run on. When the old woman had taken off her bonnet and cloak
she hastened to the boys' attic, and found Bob posted up in bed.
He had made Jackie understand what their father had done.

"And he might have been killed himself," he was saying as Mrs. Winter
entered the room, "but God kept him safe. Oh, if he had been killed—"

"'Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life
for his friends,'" Mrs. Winter interposed softly.

Bob looked at her with a simply radiant smile.

"Oh," he cried, "I do feel so proud of father! Hasn't he done
splendidly? I wonder what Tom Smith will call him now! A common
Tommy, indeed!"

By-and-bye Lizzie appeared with the tea things. She cleared the
dressing-table, which was made of two wooden boxes, and laid the meal
there; and Jackie put his pink mouse in the centre—not to be eaten,
but to be looked at.

"There," she said, "now you've got everything—bread and butter, and
jam, and cake, and a real good cup of tea—and all you've to do is to
enjoy it."

"It's quite a feast," Mrs. Winter replied, adding, "Thank you,
Lizzie."

Lizzie departed smiling; but in a few minutes she returned, something
wrapped in newspaper in her hand.

"Here's a nice meaty bone which the first-floor lodger didn't want,"
she said; "it's for Stray. Missus said he was to have it."

So Stray, too, had a share in the attic feast.



CHAPTER IX

CONCERNING TOM SMITH

WHEN Bob recovered from his cold he expected that his aunt would want
his services every evening again; but she had been obliged to engage
a man during his illness, and had decided to keep the man on. She was
beginning to realise that she had really worked the boy too hard;
she had not meant to be unkind to him.

"Lady Margaret Browning was right, you do look pale and thin, Bob,"
she told him; "you might be half-starved by the look of you. But,
though everything's so dear, I don't stint you in food, and I can't
understand why you should look as if I do!"

"I think I shall be all right if I don't have such heavy loads
to carry," Bob answered; "they used to do me up, and when I got
to bed I couldn't sleep—I ached so."

Mrs. Mead looked at him uneasily. His thin white face seemed
to reproach her, and she regretted that she had not been kinder
to her brother's children. Seeing how they had grown to love her
attic lodger, she knew that she, too, might have won their love
had she tried to do so.

"Well, Bob," she said, and there was a gentler note in her voice
than the boy had ever heard in it before, "take things easy for a
while. What you've to do now is to pick up your strength and get rid
of your cough."

The first day of Bob's return to school he encountered Tom Smith
as he was coming home in the afternoon. The bully stopped him.

"Wait a minute," he said, "I want to speak to you."

"Well?" Bob said inquiringly.

"I've been reading about your father in the newspaper," Tom informed
him; "if it's true what the newspaper says he's done—"

"Of course it's true!" interrupted Bob, adding, "I told you he was
a brave man!"

"Yes, you did," Tom assented, "I suppose you're mighty proud of him?"

"That I am!"

"So you ought to be!"

Bob was astounded. That his enemy, who had sneered at his father
for being a common Tommy, should say this!

"I expect he'll get a medal or something?" Tom suggested, after a
brief silence.

"I don't know," Bob replied. Such an idea had not occurred to him
before, and he thrilled with delight at the mere thought of it.

"You know he might have been killed," Tom reminded him; "he must have
known that, yet he went out under fire again and again."

"Yes," Bob agreed; "but you see, the men he went to help were wounded
and couldn't help themselves. I've heard him say often that there's
no call to be afraid of anything or anyone whilst we're doing what's
right, because then God's with us. He just did what he thought was
right, I expect, and—well, that was how it happened!"

There was another silence, during which the two boys regarded each
other rather doubtfully. Tom was the one to break it.

"Look here," he said, "I'm sorry I called your father a common Tommy.
He's a real hero and no mistake! If he comes home I hope you won't
tell him—" He paused momentarily, then continued: "Didn't you say
he couldn't bear to see animals of any kind badly treated? Yes? Well,
look here, don't tell him I stoned that old woman's dog. I'll promise
never to do it again, if you won't tell him."

Bob gave the promise readily, astonished; and at the same time very
relieved, for he had been most anxious about Stray, fearing Tom might
do him some further injury.

"He's a capital dog," he said, "and very gentle really. He'd never
have flown at you if you hadn't—"

"Oh, I understand all about that!" interrupted Tom hastily. "What's
his mistress called?" he inquired.

"Mrs. Winter—she's a real good sort. She lives at my aunt's,
you know; rents one of the attics, so Jackie and I know her well."

"I suppose she's very poor if she lives in an attic," remarked Tom;
"what makes her keep a dog, I wonder?"

Bob explained that Mrs. Winter had found Stray, and, seeing that Tom
appeared interested, told him the story as Mrs. Winter had told it
to Jackie and Jackie had repeated it to him.

"What a queer old soul she must be!" Tom exclaimed, laughing heartily
but not ill-naturedly, "to think God sent the dog to her, I mean!
Such a funny idea! Is she quite right here?" He tapped his forehead
meaningly.

"Right in her head? Oh, yes!" Bob answered, adding, "And so you'd
find, if you talked to her!"

No more passed between the boys then; but one fine Saturday
afternoon, a few weeks later, Tom Smith waylaid Bob and Jackie,
as they were returning from a walk accompanied by Stray, and tried
to make friends with the dog. At first Stray treated Tom with
suspicion and would not be touched by him; but at last he realised
that the boy had only friendly intentions towards him now, and
allowed him to pat him.

"He's wearing a very shabby collar," observed Tom; "the leather's
nearly worn out where the fastening is. It won't last much longer."

"I'm afraid it won't," answered Bob; "I don't know what Mrs. Winter
will do about it, because I'm sure she can't afford Stray a new
collar."

"A big dog like that ought to have a really strong collar made of the
very best leather," Tom said, "but leather's gone up in price a lot
because of the war. A new collar would cost a good bit. What are you
staring at, youngster?" he asked, addressing Jackie, who was looking
at him very seriously.

"At you," the little boy answered promptly. "You're Tom Smith,
aren't you, the boy who threw the stone at Stray and hurted him?
Did you really do it on purpose—to hurt him? Oh, how could you have
been so cruel!"

"Look here, don't let's say any more about it," Tom said, reddening.
"I shan't do it again; Bob knows that. Do you like sweets?"

He produced a small packet of sweets as he spoke, and would have
pressed it into Jackie's hand, but the little boy's good will was not
to be bought.

"No, thank you," Jackie said, "unless you are sorry that you hurted
Stray. Are you?"

"Of course I am!"

Jackie glanced at Bob, who gave him a nod; then he accepted the
sweets, and after that Tom Smith walked home with them.

"I really don't know what's come over him," Bob remarked to Mrs.
Winter, when discussing Tom's changed behaviour with her that
evening; "and wasn't it strange of him to make me promise not to tell
father that he'd hurt poor Stray?"

"He evidently has a great admiration for your father," Mrs. Winter
answered, "and would not care to have his bad opinion. There must be
good in the boy or he would not feel like that."

"I don't mean to have much to do with him though," Bob said
decidedly; "I can't—after what's gone by. To-day he seemed as though
he wanted to be friendly, but—oh, I couldn't have Tom Smith for a
friend!"



CHAPTER X

STRAY TO THE RESCUE

"BOBBIE," said Jackie, "I wonder if Mrs. Winter will ask us to tea
to-day?"

"I don't know," his brother answered; "I don't expect so."

It was Sunday afternoon, and the boys were returning from Sunday
school. They had not been invited to take tea with Mrs. Winter
for several weeks. At first Bob had been puzzled to know the reason,
but he was beginning to fear that it was because their kind old
friend was not in the position to entertain guests. He knew that food
had become very expensive, and suspected Mrs. Winter had all
she could do to provide necessaries for herself.

"Don't you think she wants to have us?" Jackie inquired wistfully.

"Oh, yes!" Bob assured him, adding quickly, "Don't speak about it
to her, Jackie, whatever you do!"

"Why not?" questioned Jackie.

"It might hurt her," Bob replied, sighing.

Jackie looked puzzled, but he said no more. That afternoon the boys
had tea with their aunt in the kitchen. Lizzie had gone to her home,
which was in Bristol.

During the meal Mrs. Mead remarked—

"I suppose Mrs. Winter's grown tired of your company, as she doesn't
ask you to tea with her now. I'm afraid you wore out your welcome."

"Oh, no!" cried Bob. Then, as Mrs. Mead laughed, he flushed and said:
"I think she can't afford to have us to tea any longer, Aunt Martha."

Mrs. Mead became serious in a minute.

"I wonder if she can be as poor as that?" she said thoughtfully.
"She may be. She had no fire the other day when I went up for her
rent, and the weather was bitter. Poor old soul! I know what I'll do;
I'll ask her to supper. I owe her something for her kindness to you
boys."

So Mrs. Winter was asked to supper, and came—Stray too. Afterwards
she sat by the fire for half an hour, and that night she went to bed
warm, which she had not done before for several weeks.

The next day, on their return from school in the afternoon, Bob and
Jackie learnt that their aunt had had a visitor.

"I never thought to see her again," she said, her face expressive
of gratification, "and I was never more surprised in my life than
when she threw back her veil—she came in a motor-car—and I recognised
Lady Margaret Browning."

"Oh!" cried Bob excitedly. Then he drew a deep sigh of
disappointment.

"I'm so sorry Jackie and I weren't here," he said regretfully.
"Did she come in, Aunt Martha?"

"That she did, and we had a nice chat together. She'd read about your
father in the newspaper, and spoke so nicely about him. I felt proud
to think he was my brother. It seems her father has a big house
on his estate in Somersetshire, which he's turned into a soldiers'
hospital, and she's helping nurse the patients. She's going back
there in a few days. But she said she should call again;
she's staying with friends at Clifton for a little change,
because she's been working too hard nursing."

"Did you tell her about Mrs. Winter; that Mrs. Winter used to be her
mother's nurse, I mean?" Bob asked eagerly.

Mrs. Mead shook her head.

"I quite forgot all about the old woman," she admitted, "But, if I'd
remembered she wouldn't have been able to see her," she added,
"for Mrs. Winter's been out with her dog all the afternoon."

When Mrs. Winter returned Bob went to her attic and told her of Lady
Margaret Browning's visit. She would have liked to have had a peep
at her, she said, to see if she was like "Miss Peggy"; then she drew
Bob's attention to Stray and the collar he was wearing—not his old,
shabby one, but another made of strong leather and ornamented with
brass studs.

"What a handsome collar!" Bob exclaimed. "Why, it must have cost
shillings!"

"I expect it did," Mrs. Winter agreed, "and it's all but new. It's a
present. Oh, Bob, I've had such a fright this afternoon! Do you
notice that Stray is wet? Well, he's been in the river!"

"Did he fall in?" asked Bob.

Mrs. Winter shook her head.

"Oh, no!" she replied, "he jumped in; but I'll tell you what
happened. We'd been for a walk and gone further than I'd meant to,
so we came home by the back lane as it was the shorter way. A lot
of children were playing in the lane, some of them close to the
river. Suddenly I heard a splash and a scream, and some one shouted
there was a little girl in the river. Then there was another splash.
Stray had seen what had happened, and had gone to the child's
rescue!"

"Oh, dear, brave Stray!" Bob cried, putting his arms around the dog,
wet though he still was, and hugging him, "And he saved the little
girl?"

"Yes. He caught her by her skirt and swam with her to the bank, where
I took her from him. She was not hurt in the least, only frightened.
Someone had run for her parents, and you can imagine their joy
at finding her safe. They could not make enough of Stray, and
insisted I should bring him into their house so that they might give
him something to eat. Then, whilst Stray was eating a plateful
of nice scraps, and the little girl's mother had taken her upstairs
to change her clothing, the father left me a minute and returned with
this handsome, brass-studded collar, which he said he thought would
just fit Stray, and begged me to accept it. I didn't quite like
taking it, but he explained that it hadn't been pawned—oh, I forgot
to say that the little girl's parents were the people at the
pawnshop!"

"Then the little girl is Tom Smith's sister!" exclaimed Bob
excitedly.

Mrs. Winter assented.

"Mr. Smith said he'd bought the collar from someone whose dog had
died," she continued, "and that I needn't mind taking it, and that
he'd feel hurt if I didn't. So then I accepted it, of course, and
very glad I am Stray has it. Mr. Smith took off the plate with my
name on it from the old collar, and put it on the new one."

"I see," Bob said, examining the collar. "I suppose you didn't see
anything of Tom at the Smith's?"

"Yes, he came in whilst I was there, and his father told him what had
happened. 'Your sister would have been drowned but for the dog!'
he said. Then I told them that I didn't usually go home by the back
lane, and I felt sure God had sent me that way to-day, and they must
thank Him for sparing them the life they loved. I think they will,
Bob."

"I should think so, too!" Bob agreed. He caressed Stray again.
"Dear old fellow!" he murmured. "Good, brave, old dog!"



CHAPTER XI

MISS PEGGY'S DAUGHTER

LADY MARGARET BROWNING kept her word and called again. This time
she came rather later in the afternoon, shortly before the boys
returned from school, and Mrs. Mead remembered to tell her that her
mother's old nurse occupied one of the attics.

"Oh, I've heard my father mention her!" she cried; "he was speaking
of her only the other day, and wondering if she was still living.
My mother loved her ever so dearly. Oh, please, please let me
see her!"

So it came about that when the boys arrived home, on going straight
upstairs to Mrs. Winter's attic, as they usually did to fetch Stray
for a walk before tea, they found Lady Margaret Browning there.
She was seated close to Mrs. Winter, and the two were talking of
"Miss Peggy." Stray, standing with his head resting on her knee,
was looking up into her face approvingly.

"Come in, both of you!" Mrs. Winter said, as the boys stood
hesitating in the doorway; and they obeyed, Jackie following
his brother shyly.

Lady Margaret rose and shook hands with Bob, then she kissed Jackie,
and, seating herself again, drew the little fellow close to her and
kept her arm around him whilst she talked to the others.

Jackie stood very still, every now and again glancing up into the
sweet, fair face of Mrs. Winter's visitor, which, each time he did
so, smiled tenderly at him. So this was the lady who had given Bob so
much money in return for her brooch. Yes, she was wearing the brooch
now. As his eyes noted it she put up her hand and touched it.

"I've had the fastener made safer," she said to Mrs. Winter. "Oh, I
was so delighted to get it back! I shall always feel thankful to Bob
for having found it."

"I'm so glad I did," said Bob, adding quickly, "I don't mean because
of the reward."

"Aunt Martha's kept all the money!" Jackie stated abruptly.

"She's going to keep it for me till father comes back, then I'm going
to give it to him," Bob explained; "but I'd have liked to have spent
a little of it. I wanted to give Jackie a toy horse, and Mrs. Winter
something."

"I take the will for the deed, Bob," smiled Mrs. Winter.

By-and-bye, Lady Margaret rose to leave, and Bob accompanied her
downstairs. Mrs. Mead bustled out of the shop into the passage
on hearing them talking. Lady Margaret, who had come on foot, asked
if Bob might go with her as far as the street where she meant to take
a tram.

"Certainly, my lady," Mrs. Mead replied; "he'll be proud and pleased,
I'm sure."

Bob was indeed proud and pleased as he walked along by Lady
Margaret's side. She asked him many questions about Mrs. Winter,
and he told her all he knew about her, and how wonderfully kind
she had been to Jackie and him.

"Aunt Martha didn't understand about Jackie," he explained;
"she thought he was naughty because he always cried when she put him
to bed. It was not that—he was frightened. But now he isn't
frightened any more because Mrs. Winter's taught him Jesus is with
him. If it's ever so dark he doesn't cry now."

"Oh, Bob, how glad you must be!" Lady Margaret said earnestly.
"I hope Jackie will always remember Jesus is with him. We all need to
remember that, don't we, because life is so dark sometimes? Then it
is such a comfort to know there is One in the darkness to cling to,
and that out weakness may become strength through Him."

They had reached the tramline now, after having passed through
several back streets, but there was no tram in sight. Lady Margaret
glanced at her watch, then said—

"See, here is a nice toyshop! Tell me what sort of horse you meant
to give Jackie, I should like to buy one for him."

"Oh, how kind of you, my lady!" cried Bob. "Oh, thank you,
thank you!"

He followed her into the shop. Quickly the purchase was made, wrapped
in brown paper, and placed in Bob's arms. By that time a tram was
coming, and they had to hurry from the shop. A minute later Bob was
standing alone on the pavement, and Lady Margaret Browning had gone.

Jackie was almost overwhelmed with Joy and gratitude when he saw the
present Lady Margaret Browning had sent him by his brother.

"Oh, Bobbie!" was all he said at first, but the sight of his glowing
face, as he knelt on the kitchen floor examining the toy, told of the
feelings he could find no words to express. "Well, now, this is
certainly very kind of Lady Margaret," remarked Mrs. Mead, who was
standing by; "she must have taken a fancy to you, Jackie. Bob, do you
know she thinks your father will have the Military Cross—he's almost
sure to, she says."

So it was no great surprise when a few days later news came that the
boys' father had indeed won the medal, and many were the warm
congratulations Mrs. Mead and her young nephews received.

"Your father deserves it," Tom Smith said to Bob heartily; "I want
you to tell me more about him—I like hearing of people who do brave
things. I say—" he reddened as he spoke—"I suppose you've heard that
Stray saved my little sister from drowning?"

"Yes. And I've seen the collar your father gave him; it's a beauty."

Tom nodded. He was silent a minute, then he said—

"Look here, I told a lie about that ruby brooch, I never saw it till
you had it in your hand after you'd picked it up. I'm sorry now I
behaved as I did about it. Do you believe me?"

"Yes," Bob answered, much astonished. "Say no more about it!"
he added, observing that Tom really looked ashamed of himself.

"All right!" Tom agreed, "I'm sure I don't want to!" He paused
hesitatingly, then asked: "Can't we be friends?"

"Perhaps, if you stop bullying and telling lies," Bob replied
doubtfully.

"Oh, well," Tom said, his countenance brightening, "I'll see what
I can do!"



CHAPTER XII

CONCLUSION

"OH, Bobbie, look! Oh, quick! look, look!" Jackie clutched his
brother's arm as he spoke, and pointed excitedly after a handsome
motor brougham which had just passed them, and was now disappearing
around a corner of the street. The boys were on their way home from
morning school.

"Oh, you didn't see!" the little boy cried, in a tone of
disappointment, "and Stray was looking out of the window, too!
Oh, I wonder if he saw us? And Mrs. Winter!"

"You don't mean to say that Mrs. Winter and Stray are in that
beautiful motor-car?" cried Bob incredulously. "Haven't you made
a mistake, Jackie?"

"Oh, no, I haven't!" Jackie protested. "Oh, I do wish you'd seen
them! Where can they be going?"

"Let's hurry home and find out."

Arrived at home they went direct to the kitchen, and questioned
Lizzie. The girl was looking pleased and excited.

"Oh, so you met the car!" she said; "it belongs to some grand folks
living on Clifton Down, friends of Lady Margaret Browning's."

"The friends she's staying with?" inquired Bob.

Lizzie nodded. "The chauffeur brought a note for Mrs. Winter, and
said he was to wait," the explained, "I took the note up to her
and waited while she read it. It put her in a bit of a fluster.
She told me Lady Margaret Browning wanted her to spend the day
with her and bring Stray with her, and the car had been sent to fetch
them. So she's gone, and Stray too—looking just as though he'd been
used to ride in a car all his life! Now, you may depend something
will come of this. Missus will soon be losing her attic lodger,
I expect."

"Why should you think that?" asked Bob quickly.

"Never you mind!" replied Lizzie, mysteriously. "If I'm right
we all ought to be glad, so don't you begin to pull a long face.
Mrs. Winter's been very poor, but I'm beginning to hope she's seen
her poorest days. We shall see!"

When the boys met their aunt at dinner they found that she, too,
expected to lose her attic lodger before long.

"I shall be sorry when she goes," she remarked, "for she's paid her
rent regularly and been kind to you boys. A real good woman she is,
and I wish her well."

The shop was closed, and Jackie was in bed and asleep that night
before Mrs. Winter and Stray came home. They returned in the motor
brougham, and were met by Mrs. Mead in the passage.

"Come into the kitchen and have a warm by the fire before you go
upstairs, Mrs. Winter," she said. "I hope you have spent a pleasant
day."

"Yes, thank you," Mrs. Winter answered; "a very pleasant day."

She took the chair Mrs. Mead offered her by the fire, whilst Stray
went to Bob, who put an arm around his neck and hugged him.

"I've missed you, old chap!" the boy whispered. "Was he good,
Mrs. Winter?" he asked.

"As good as gold!" Mrs. Winter replied. "Oh, I've had such a happy
time with Lady Margaret and her father!" she continued; "her father
came last night to fetch her home. They made so much of me—treated me
quite like a friend! If only Miss Peggy had been there, but—oh, God
knows best! And Lady Margaret's so like her mother! I told her father
so—he liked hearing it. I couldn't think of him as a great nobleman!
To me he will always be just Miss Peggy's husband!"

She paused a minute, smiling, then went on—

"Oh, he was wonderfully kind! He had a long talk with me alone,
and said he was sorry to hear I was not very well off; and then he
offered me a cottage, rent free, on his estate in Somersetshire,
and the wherewithal to live there—"

"Oh, dear!" broke in Bob. "Oh, I know I ought to be glad, but—oh,
I suppose I'm dreadfully selfish! I don't want you to go away!"

"You'd like to keep me here?" Mrs. Winter asked eagerly. "Oh, my
dear!" she exclaimed as he nodded, "how sweet it is to think that!—
to know I should be missed if I went!"

"If?" said Mrs. Mead inquiringly. "I suppose there's no doubt about
it? Of course you're going?"

Mrs. Winter shook her head.

"No," she said. "No. I told Miss Peggy's husband I was too old
to live in a cottage alone, and that I liked to be where other
people—especially young people—were about, and that I'd become quite
attached to my attic home. I said I wished to remain here, and if
he'd be so generous as to help me with a little money, I should have
nothing in the world left to wish for. And that's what he's going
to do. I've explained all this because you've been so kind,
Mrs. Mead—"

"Kind? Me?" interrupted Mrs. Mead in astonishment. "What have I
done?"

"Helped me feed Stray for one thing," Mrs. Winter replied, "and let
me come here sometimes and warm myself when I've had no fire upstairs
for another. I wouldn't wish a better landlady than you."

"And I'm sure I wouldn't wish a better lodger than you!" said Mrs.
Mead heartily; "I doubt if you're doing the best for yourself,
but I'm very glad you're going to stay on. But a dear little cottage
in the country all to yourself! Have you considered—"

"I've considered everything!" Mrs. Winter interposed, her bright,
dark eyes shining happily; "and I'm sure I've decided for the best."

Bob said nothing; but he drew a deep sigh of intense relief, and
by-and-bye slipped upstairs to tell Jackie, if he should be awake,
that there was no fear of Mrs. Winter's going away. But Jackie was
sleeping peacefully, so he did not disturb him, and went to bed too.

Both boys were asleep when some while later Mrs. Winter, carrying a
lighted candle, opened the door noiselessly and peeped into the room.
She tip-toed to the bed, and stood for a minute or two looking
tenderly and lovingly at the sleepers, whilst she breathed a hope,
which was actually a prayer, that God would permit her to continue
to care for them until their father came home.



THE END.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHILST FATHER WAS
FIGHTING ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you “AS-IS”, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
